hi this is Prussia talker this math
problem was so hard it caused an uproar
over social media and had some Scottish
students in tears a crocodile is
stalking a zebra that is 20 meters
upstream on the opposite side of a river
crocodiles travel at different speeds on
land and in water the crocodile can
stalk the prey faster if it swims to a
point P that is X metres upstream on the
other side of the river the time taken
in tens of a second is given by the
following equation part one calculate
the time if the crocodile does not
travel on land
part two calculate the time if the
crocodile swims the shortest distance
possible and part three calculate the
shortest time and the corresponding
value of X can you solve it give this
puzzle a try
when you're ready keep watching the
video I'm going to present the solution
and at the very end for part three I'm
going to present a solution they
probably would not have accepted but
it's what I would consider to be the
elegant solution and it actually can
help you solve many problems like this
so let's tackle the first part calculate
the time of the crocodile does not
travel on land
this means the crocodile travels
entirely in the water
this means the crocodile is traveling
all the way across point P is all the
way by the zebra and so that means X is
equal to 20 we can substitute that value
into the equation for time and find that
the time taken is approximately 104
tenths of a second part to calculate the
time if the crocodile swims the shortest
distance possible
I was a little confused by the wording
the question what they mean is calculate
the time of the crocodile takes the
least amount of distance in the water so
that happens if the crocodile goes
directly across the water because any
other path the crocodile takes is going
to be a longer distance in the water so
basically the crocodile is traveling all
20 meters on land so in this case X goes
all the way X meters upstream is zero so
the time will be equal to one hundred
and ten tenths of a second part three
calculate the shortest time and the
corresponding value of X this problem is
about calculus and the standard way to
solve this is you take the derivative of
the time and set it equal to zero you
need to remember to use the chain rule
you want to take one-half times 36 plus
x squared raised to the power of
negative 1/2 and then remember to
multiply by 2x if you can do that and
set up this equation it requires a
little bit of manipulation but you'll
eventually get that x equals 8 and the
time is 98 tenths of a second so this is
probably the way they expected students
to solve it on the prowl on the exam but
there's a much more elegant way and it
actually brings into physics so the
first thing you need to do is actually
you need to reverse-engineer some of the
question they've actually given you the
time it takes for the crocodile to get
to the zebra what they've left out is
some of the background we actually don't
usually know this kind of neat equation
what we usually get is we as you have to
figure out all right if you're traveling
X meters upstream that means the
distance you're traveling on land is 20
minus X so if you look at the equation
for time the 20 minus X appears in the
second part so it's being multiplied by
4 because that refers to the speed of
the crocodile so we can kind of deduce
the crocodile must have a land speed of
1/4
meters-per-second similarly if we look
at the other part of the equation we can
see that five must refer to the water
speed and in order to have that 36 plus
x squared where is that square root
coming from this is because we have a
hypotenuse which must be the square root
of 36 plus x squared and here we have
six so there's a right triangle form
between the distance the crocodile
travels in the water the amount x2
travels upstream and we can deduce the
distance across the river must be six in
order for the hypotenuse to be the
square root of 36 plus x squared so why
are we reverse engineering this you'll
see in a second so I'm going to get rid
of some of the Proms and we're just
going to make a kind of physics analogy
so right here let's consider the path
the crocodile takes in the water and
then the path the crocodile takes on
land so you could think about this as
light traveling through 2 to 4 mediums
so imagine light is traveling through
water and then it's going on land or you
could have you know maybe there's a
classic problem where a swimmer is
running on sand and then going into the
ocean and swimming and there are
different rates in these two mediums so
we set up these right triangles and we
have angles theta 1 and theta 2 from the
separation between the two mediums the
two the water and the land and there's
something called Snell's law which tells
you a relation between these angles sine
of theta 1 divided by sine of theta 2 is
always equal to the ratio of the
velocities in the two mediums so where
are the velocities coming from in this
case we need to figure out this is why
we figured out what the land and the
water speed was we actually have a
special case before I get to that in
this case theta 2 you can see is a
90-degree angle once you get to land
you're going straight and so that means
this simplifies into sine of theta 1 is
equal to the ratio of the velocities so
what are the velocities in these two
mediums well we have the water speed was
fifth and the land speed is one fourth
so that means the sine of theta one is
the ratio of one fifth and one fourth
which is 4/5 now how does a sine of an
angle ever equal 4/5 that only happens
in a right triangle specifically a 3 4 5
right triangle in our diagram we must
have a 3 4 5 right triangle and we have
the smallest leg that's equal to 6 so
that means our hypotenuse is 10 and the
other leg is 8 because we've doubled a 3
4 5 right triangle and like magic we
figured out that X has to equal 8 we can
substitute that back into the equation
for time and then we get time equals 98
so it's a very elegant solution if you
use Snell's law this relates to optics
and a bunch of other physics problems so
this is probably not the answer they
would have wanted but it's a very cool
way to solve it thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math and game theory you
can catch me on my blog mind your
decisions which you can follow on
Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch me on social media at pressure
Walker and if you liked this video
please check out my books there's links
in the video description